# What I did, how I did it, and why?

## Overview of the methodology

The objective here is to take two datasets, one from the hospital side and another from the payer side, align the records somehow, calculate the difference in rates and assess how much we can trust each comparison.
Here is an overview of how I approached this problem:

- Identify a set of columns in each dataset that we can use to definitively link the two. For example, if two rows from the datasets don't have the same hospital, it's clearly wrong to compare them to one another. I will call these the "join columns".
- Link the two datasets using "join columns" but do a full outer join so we keep records that do not match the other dataset. This allows us to calculate a new field "match_source" that can be either of the datasets or both.
- Identify information in one dataset or both that we can use to assess whether two rows from the datasets lend themselves reasonably to comparison. I will call these the "evaluation columns". These are different than the "join columns" because there is some fuzziness around these. For example, the hospital dataset has a column "setting" which contains "inpatient", "outpatient" or "both". If we could determine some sort of setting from the payer dataset, then we could use these two columns to assess the chances that a match might involve the same setting.
- Devise a measure of "confidence" in the match. The higher the confidence, the more likely two rows might correspond to the "same thing".
- Combine "confidence" and "match_source" into a new field that puts each match into a tier, from highly reliable to less reliable.

## Details of the methodology

### Determining join columns

Obvious fields here were the hospital name, payer name, code type and code. There is also a column in the hospital dataset named "standard_charge_methodology" and a column in the payer dataset named "negotiation_type" that seemed to be highly related to another both semantically and in terms of the types of values they include. I will go through my thoughts on each and details on what I did there.

- **Hospital name:** there is no such field in the payer dataset, but there is EIN which is Employer ID Number from IRS. I noticed that the hospital dataset has a column with source file, which does have the EINs for each hospital. I decided to build a map based on this and use that to populate the name field in the payer dataset.
    - For scaling purposes, it would make sense to use a public API like one Propublica has. We could also populate a lookup table as we ingest files, scraping the EIN from the file, only falling back to the API for file names that do not include the EIN.
- **Payer name:** some normalization was needed here because payer names were coming in lower and upper case as well as abbreviations. I built a map to normalize this to what's there in the payer dataset. We could scale this up by having a map of common abbreviations but could also use similarity measures like Levenshtein distance to capture minor and uncommon misspellings (e.g. United Healthcare vs Unided Healthcare).
- **Code type:** I noticed that there is a code type called "LOCAL" in hospital dataset. I am not sure what that was about but it only came from NYU Langone so I thought maybe that's something weird for that hospital. Those codes looked like CPT codes too, so I decided to change that to CPT.
    - This might be questionable: what if this is how some hospitals bill different types of the same procedure, for some reason? I would want to see if it pops up in any other hospital, and maybe also ask some SMEs in hospitals where it does.
- **Code:** I saw that in some instances, the code type was included in the code, e.g. "MS-DRG 872", so I separated code type from code for those cases.
- **Charge methodology:** I noticed that there are two differently-named columns in the two datasets that seemed to include very similar/same charging and negotiation types, like "percentage" and "fee schedule". I defined a map to normalize these in the two datasets. I noticed a couple things with the hospital dataset. First, there was "other" which is not clearly associated with any negotiation type, so I left it as is rather than assuming anything. Second, there were a small number of rows where the methodology was some numeric value. I checked these rows all of which came from NYU Langone. It looked like there might have been some column shift in those, presumably during export. I could not tell where exactly this shift might have occurred so I did not make any assumptions and left it as is. These rows will not match anything in the payer dataset but there are so few of them, I am fine with it for now. It would be good to have some type checks during ingest so we can mark those erroneous rows automatically and monitor it.

### Evaluation columns

These columns are not used in left join, but to calculate a measure of "confidence" that two rows that are matched on join columns might be talking about the "same thing". By definition, this comparison is done only for rows that are matched by the "join columns" above.

- **plan_name vs network_name:** hospital dataset comes with a plan name and payer dataset comes with a network name. These two are not aligned with one another, but when we look at the values in network name, these are all commercial PPO networks. If a plan name shows things like "Medicare", that's clearly not a great alignment with the networks that pop up in the payer dataset. Rates are likely be quite different based on what we are talking about, PPO vs HMO vs EPO etc. On the other hand, while messy, plan names do sometimes literally say PPO or contain keywords that are aligned with the network name, in which case I would say they are more compatible with the network names. This is probably pretty clunky, but I wrote a simple function that returns a score based on how "aligned" a plan name might be to a PPO/commercial network like we see in the payer dataset. I say "clunky" because the rules are hardcoded and it might be just incomplete or we might get new plan names that do not conform to those set rules. I don't have any evidence for this looking at the files that I had or source file name column in the hospital dataset, but if files provided by hospitals indicate both plan name AND network name, this link might be there already for us. If that plan-network pairs are provided, this would allow us to maybe infer what type a given network might be, for example, PPO if a majority of plans associated with the network have PPO in the name. This is a touch problem though and would be important to have a better solution than what I have.
- **setting**: hospital dataset has a setting column that has "inpatient", "outpatient" or "both". There is no such column in the payer dataset but there is a list-like column that has place of service. I thought that this would be a good candidate to determine if this list has a mix of outpatient and inpatient or just one of them. CMS has a web page with these codes listed and I pointed Claude to this list as well as unique lists that I observed in the dataset, and asked to come up with a minimal list of place codes that unambiguously indicate an inpatient or outpatient setting. Then I used these lists to determine if each list of place of service indicates a mix of outpatient and inpatient, or just one of them, and put this assessment into a new "inferred_setting" column in the payer dataset. This is again clunky because it's not exhaustive and there is probably some subjectivity in determining clearly inpatient or outpatient codes.

### A measure of "confidence"

I used evaluation columns described above to calculate, first, a plan confidence and setting confidence score for each row where hospital data is matched to payer data. In both calculations, if there is no plan name or either setting or inferred setting are empty (e.g. place of setting list is not provided), I gave a neutral score of 0.5. Better matches (e.g. a clearly PPO plan name or inferred setting matches hospital setting) get higher scores, while clearly wrong matches get lower scores.

Once I calculate these two scores, I combine them into a single "confidence score" where I gave setting match a higher weight simply because plan names are so messy. This is something we can play with or different approaches (what if we multiply rather than add?) might be possible.

### Match tier

Finally, I combined the confidence score with the amount of information we have for each row in the final dataset, i.e. only hospital data, payer data, or both, as well as the calculated difference between hospital and payer rates, where applicable (i.e. when we have information from both). For the rate difference, I calculated percent difference between the two and made sure that we use the "standard_charge_negotiated_percentage" column from the hospital dataset when methodology involves "percentage". This tiered approach gives us a sense of what amount of information we have as well as how much confidence we have that the rates that are being compared talk about "similar things". For example, tiers that says "high confidence" indicate that both setting and plan name indicate good match, while "low confidence" indicates the opposite. On the other hand "hospital only" and "payer only" indicate that we only have partial information that we cannot really verify from the other side of the equation.

# Some observations and thoughts

Obviously I could not spend much "quality time" with this dataset and I had to gain some of the domain knowledge as I went, but here are a couple of things that I ended up thinking and wanted to capture here.

- When I looked at the matches where we have information from both the hospital and payer sides, ranked in the same "high confidence" tier, I still saw a lot of different rates coming from the payer side for the same code. This means that there are a lot of sometimes wildly different rates. Something that probably comes into play here is a column that I ended up using which includes National Provider IDs (NPI) which sounds like the set of provider entities a rate is negotiated for. I noticed that these differed a lot in content and the length, and sometimes an NPI was present in multiple lists. I am not sure what this is about but there seems to be a lot more about how these things are negotiated and applied (for a given NPI, which one do I use??).
- I noticed, being prompted by the instructions, that MS-DRG 872 behaved differently than other codes. This code refers to sepsis without major complications and comorbities and it looked like majority of these records ended up in the "low confidence" tier while the majority of others ended up in "high confidence" tiers (though mostly with big difference in rate). Furthermore, I realized that there were no cases where rows with that code ended up in the high confidence tier with significant rate match. In other words, the best it got with sepsis was a setting match, with a big rate difference.
    - I tracked these differences down to a few things. First, while setting for this code is always inpatient in the hospital dataset (makes sense), inferred setting ended up being "unknown" in the payer dataset because a lot of the rates with this code came with no place of service data. I looked around for this a bit, and this might be due to how payers bill sepsis as an institutional claim rather than a professional claim. Second, the rate difference might be due to structural discrepancy between how payers report rates for MS-DRG and how hospitals expect to be paid. Maybe payers report a clean base rate while for a condition like sepsis, hospitals rarely use that base rate and there are additional expenses that come on top of that, e.g. from clinical context. This could mean that the payer data is not a good benchmark for all types of codes, and codes like MS-DRG might require other types of benchmark. For example, hospital dataset has CMS baseline, maybe CMS has more relevant benchmarks for that?
